CHAPTER 1:

In this first chapter, we will look back briefly at the history of genetics, and in doing so, we will review some of the basic concepts of genetics discovered over the last 100 years. After that, we will look at a few examples of how genetic analysis is being applied today to critical problems in biology, agriculture, and human health. You will see how contemporary research in genetics integrates concepts discovered decades ago with recent technological advances. You will see that genetics today is a dynamic field of investigation in which new discoveries are continually advancing our understanding of the biological world.

LOs: 
1. Describe the way in which modern genetics developed.
2. List the main cellular constituents involved in gene expression and action.
3. Give some examples of how genetics has influences modern medicine, agriculture, and evolution

CHAPTER 2:

Simply states, the general steps of functional analysis by gene discovery are as follows:
1. Amass mutants affecting the biological property of interest.
2. Cross (mate) the mutants to wild-type organisms to see if their descendents show ratios of wild to mutant that are characteristic of single-gene inheritance.
3. Deduce the functions of the gene at the molecular level
4. Deduce how the gene interacts with other genes to produce the propert in question.

Steps 1 and 2 will be covered in the present chapter.

LOs:
1. Discover a set of genes affecting a specific  biological property of interest, by observing  single-gene inheritance ratios of mutants  affecting that property.
2. In the progeny of controlled crosses,  recognize phenotypic ratios diagnostic of  single-gene inheritance (1 : 1 in haploids, and  3 : 1, 1 : 2 : 1, and 1 : 1 in diploids).
3. Explain single-gene inheritance ratios in  terms of chromosome behavior at meiosis.
4. Predict phenotypic ratios among  descendants from crosses of parents differing  at a single gene.
5. Propose reasonable hypotheses to explain  dominance and recessiveness of specific  alleles at the molecular level.
6. Apply the rules of single-gene inheritance to  pedigree analysis in humans, and recognize  patterns diagnostic of autosomal dominant,  autosomal recessive, X-linked dominant, and  X-linked recessive conditions.
7. Calculate risk of descendants inheriting a  condition caused by a mutant allele in one or  more specific ancestors.

CHAPTER 6:

Dominance and dominance types



HOMEWORK 1 -- CHAPTERS 1 AND 2

Ch. 1:  INTRODUCTION TO COURSE AND TOPICS
Problems 1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12


1. If the white-flowered parental variety in Figure 1-3 were crossed to the first-generation hybrid plant in that figure, what types of progeny would you expect to see and in what proportions?

Answer: You would get a 1:1 ratio of purple to white. This is because the first-generation hybrid plant has one copy of the purple allele and one copy of the white allele, and as a result, 50 percent of the gametes would carry the purple allele and 50 percent of the gametes would carry the white allele. The white-flowered parental variety has two copies of the white allele, and all the gametes produced from the white plant will carry the white allele. Hence, a cross between the two would produce a 1:1 ratio of purple to white.

4. Figure 1-7 shows a simplified pathway for arginine synthesis in Neurospora. Suppose you have a special strain of Neurospora that makes citrulline but not arginine. Which gene(s) are likely mutant or missing in your special strain? You have a second strain of Neurospora that makes neither citrulline nor arginine but does make ornithine. Which gene(s) are mutant or missing in this strain?

Answer: If the mutant strain makes citrulline, that means genes A and B must be functional. Therefore, the only gene that is missing or mutant in the first Neurospora strain must be gene C.

In the second strain, gene A must be functional since it is able to make ornithine. Gene B must be missing or mutant since it is unable to make citrulline. However, gene C may or may not be missing/ mutant. Enzyme C converts citrulline into arginine (they are in the same sequential pathway), and enzyme C is dependent on the availability of citrulline for its function.

5. Consider Figure 1-8a.
a. What do the small blue spheres represent?
b. What do the brown slabs represent?
c. Do you agree with the analogy that DNA is structured like a ladder?

Answer:
a. The blue ribbon represents sugar phosphate backbone (deoxyribose and a phosphate group), while
the blue spheres signify atoms.
b. Brown slabs show complementary bases (A, T, G, and C). 
c. Yes, it is a helical structure.

6. In Figure 1-8b, can you tell if the number of hydrogen bonds between adenine and thymine is the same as that between cytosine and guanine? Do you think that a DNA molecule with a high content of A + T would be more stable than one with a high content of G + C?

Answer: There are two hydrogen bonds between adenine and thymine; three between guanine and cytosine. No, the molecule with a high content of G-C would be more stable.

10. Below is the sequence of a single strand of a short DNA molecule. On a piece of paper, rewrite this sequence and then write the sequence of the complementary strand below it.

GTTCGCGGCCGCGAAC

Comparing the top and bottom strands, what do you notice about the relationship between them?

Answer: 
GTTCGCGGCCGCGAAC 
CAAGCGCCGGCGCTTG

11. Mendel studied a tall variety of pea plants with stems that are 20 cm long and a dwarf variety with stems that are only 12 cm long.

a. Under blending theory, how long would you expect the stems of first and second hybrids to be? 
b. Under Mendelian rules, what would you expect to observe in the second-generation hybrids if all
the first-generation hybrids were tall?

Answer:
a. First-generation hybrids would have stems 16 cm long because that is the average between 20 cm
and 12 cm. The second generation would be a product of two 16-cm stemmed plants mating, so
they would also have stems 16 cm long.
b. If the first-generation hybrids are all tall, then tall must be dominant, and you would expect a 3:1
ratio of tall:dwarf in the second generation.

12. If a DNA double helix that is 100 base pairs in length has 32 adenines, how many cytosines, guanines, and thymines must it have?

Answer: Thymines = 32, Cytosines = 68, Guanines = 68

Number of thymines is 32 because thymine and adenine are paired, so the number of adenines equals the number of thymines. The remaining 136 base pairs must be cytosines and guanines. The number of cytosines equals the number of guanines because those bases are paired. Therefore, there are 136 ÷ 2 = 68 base pairs of each.



TOPIC: MENDEL'S LAWS AND DOMINANCE

Ch. 2: 3, 40, 43, 46, 49; 

3. In Table 2-1, state the recessive phenotype in each of the seven cases.

Answer: wrinkled seeds; green seeds; white petals; pinched pods; yellow pods; terminal flowers;
short stems

40. In the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, a geneticist is interested in the development of trichomes (small projections). A large screen turns up two mutant plants (A and B) that have no trichomes, and these mutants seem to be potentially useful in studying trichome development. (If they were determined by single-gene mutations, then finding the normal and abnormal functions of these genes would be instructive.) Each plant is crossed with wild type; in both cases, the next generation (F1) had normal trichomes. When F1 plants were selfed, the resulting F2’s were as follows:

F2 from mutant A: 602 normal; 198 no trichomes F2 from mutant B: 267 normal; 93 no trichomes
a. What do these results show? Include proposed genotypes of all plants in your answer.
b. Under your explanation to part a, is it possible to confidently predict the F1 from crossing the
original mutant A with the original mutant B? 

Answer:
a.
The data for both crosses suggest that both A and B mutant plants are homozygous for recessive alleles. Both F2 crosses give 3:1 ratios of normal to mutant progeny. For example, let A = normal and a = mutant, then
P F1 F2
A/A ¥ a/a A/a
1 A/A
2 A/a
1 a a
phenotype: normal
phenotype: normal
phenotype: mutant (no trichomes)

43. In the pedigree below, the black symbols represent individuals with a very rare blood disease.
If you had no other information to go on, would you think it more likely that the disease was domi- nant or recessive? Give your reasons.

Answer: You are told that the disease being followed in this pedigree is very rare. If the allele that results in this disease is recessive, then the father would have to be homozygous and the mother would have to be heterozygous for this allele. On the other hand, if the trait is dominant, then all that is necessary to explain the pedigree is that the father is heterozygous for the allele that causes the disease. This is the better choice, as it is more likely given the rarity of the disease.

46. Suppose that a husband and wife are both heterozygous for a recessive allele for albinism. If they have dizygotic (two-egg) twins, what is the probability that both the twins will have the same phe- notype for pigmentation?

Answer: Because the parents are heterozygous, both are A/a. Both twins could be albino or both twins could be normal (and = multiply, or = add). The probability of being normal (A/–) is 3/4, and the probability of being albino (a/a) is 1/4.
p(both normal) + p(both albino)
p(first normal) ¥ p(second normal) + p(first albino) ¥ p(second albino)
(3/4)(3/4) + (1/4)(1/4) = 9/16 + 1/16 = 5/8

49. winged seed selfed question



TOPIC: MITOSIS AND MEIOSIS
18-19, 22, 27, 30; 

18. Name the key function of mitosis.

Answer: The key function of mitosis is to generate two daughter cells that are genetically identical
to the original parent cell.

19. Name two key functions of meiosis.

Answer: Two key functions of meiosis are to halve the DNA content and to reshuffle the genetic
content of the organism to generate genetic diversity among the progeny.

22. In what ways does the second division of meiosis differ from mitosis?

Answer: As cells divide mitotically, each chromosome consists of identical sister chromatids that are separated to form genetically identical daughter cells. Although the second division of meiosis ap- pears to be a similar process, the “sister” chromatids are likely to be different. Recombination during earlier meiotic stages has swapped regions of DNA between sister and nonsister chromosomes such that the two daughter cells of this division typically are not genetically identical.

27. If children obtain half their genes from one parent and half from the other parent, why aren’t siblings identical?

Answer: Because the “half” inherited is very random, the chances of receiving exactly the same half is vanishingly small. Ignoring recombination and focusing just on which chromosomes are inherited from one parent, there are 223 = 8,388,608 possible combinations!

30. Four of the following events are part of both meiosis and mitosis, but only one is meiotic. Which one? (1) chromatid formation, (2) spindle formation, (3) chromosome condensation, (4) chromo- some movement to poles, (5) synapsis

Answer: (5) chromosome pairing (synapsis)



TOPIC: SEX LINKAGE AND PEDIGREES

13, 50, 53, 61;

13. Could the pedigree in Figure 2-31 be explained as an autosomal dominant disorder? Explain.

Answer: Yes, it could in some cases, but in this case we have clues that the pedigree is for a sex- linked dominant trait. First, if fathers have a gene, only daughters would receive it; and second, if mothers have a gene, both sons and daughters would receive it.

50. skin disorder pedigree

53. kidney disease pedigree

61. Duchenne muscular dystrophy is sex-linked and usually affects only males. Victims of the disease become progressively weaker, starting early in life.
a. What is the probability that a woman whose brother has Duchenne’s disease will have an af-
fected child?
b. If your mother’s brother (your uncle) had Duchenne’s disease, what is the probability that you
have received the allele?
c. If your father’s brother had the disease, what is the probability that you have received the allele?

lots of pedigrees in answer











